VLC user guide

Henri Fallon

Alexis de Lattre

Johan Bilien

Anil Daoud

Mathieu Gautier

Clément Stenac

Copyright © 2002, 2003 the VideoLAN project


 This document is the complete user guide of VLC .

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later
version published by the Free Software Foundation ; with no Invariant
Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts. The text
of the license can be found in the appendix GNU Free Documentation License.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
    1.1. What is the VideoLAN project ?
    1.2. What is a codec ?
    1.3. How can I use VideoLAN ?
    1.4. Command line usage
   
   
2. Modules and options for VLC
    2.1. The modules
    2.2. Video outputs
    2.3. Video filters modules
    2.4. Audio outputs
    2.5. Input modules
    2.6. Demuxers
    2.7. Interface modules
    2.8. Codec modules
    2.9. OS support modules
    2.10. Miscellaneous
    2.11. Compilation Options
   
   
3. Installing VLC
    3.1. Installing VLC
    3.2. Uninstalling VLC
   
   
4. The command line interface
    4.1. Introduction
    4.2. Opening streams
    4.3. Modules selection
    4.4. Stream Output
    4.5. Other Options
   
   
5. The Mozilla plugin
    5.1. Install the plugin
    5.2. Build HTML pages that use the plugin
   
   
A. GNU Free Documentation License
    A.1. PREAMBLE
    A.2. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
    A.3. VERBATIM COPYING
    A.4. COPYING IN QUANTITY
    A.5. MODIFICATIONS
    A.6. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
    A.7. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
    A.8. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
    A.9. TRANSLATION
    A.10. TERMINATION
    A.11. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
    A.12. ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents
   
   

List of Figures
1-1. Global VideoLAN solution La solution VideoLAN globale
1-2. Windows terminal
1-3. Linux X terminal
1-4. Mac OS X terminal
1-5. BeOS terminal

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter 1. Introduction

1.1. What is the VideoLAN project ?

1.1.1. Overview

VideoLAN is a complete software solution for video streaming, developed by
students of the Ecole Centrale Paris and developers from all over the world,
under the GNU General Public License (GPL). VideoLAN is designed to stream
MPEG videos on high bandwidth networks.

The VideoLAN solution includes :

  * VLS (VideoLAN Server), which can stream MPEG-1, MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 files,
    DVDs, digital satellite channels, digital terrestial television channels
    and live videos on the network in unicast or multicast,
   
  * VLC (initially VideoLAN Client), which can be used as a server to stream
    MPEG-1, MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 files, DVDs and live videos on the network in
    unicast or multicast ; or used as a client to receive, decode and display
    MPEG streams under multiple operating systems.
   

Here is an illustration of the complete VideoLAN solution :


Figure 1-1. Global VideoLAN solution La solution VideoLAN globale

[global-diagram]

More details about the project can be found on the [http://www.videolan.org/]
VideoLAN Web site.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.1.2. VideoLAN software

1.1.2.1. VLC

VLC works on many platforms : Linux, Windows, Mac OS X, BeOS, *BSD, Solaris,
Familiar Linux, Yopy/Linupy and QNX. It can read :

  * MPEG-1, MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 / DivX files from a hard disk, a CD-ROM drive,
    ...
   
  * DVDs and VCDs,
   
  * from a satellite card (DVB-S),
   
  * MPEG-1, MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 streams from the network sent by VLS or VLC's
    stream output.
   

 VLC can also be used as a server to stream :

  * MPEG-1, MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 / DivX files,
   
  * DVDs,
   
  * from an MPEG encoding card,
   

  to :

  * one machine (i.e. to one IP address) : this is called unicast,
   
  * a dynamic group of machines that the clients can join or leave (i.e. to a
    multicast IP address) : this is called multicast,
   

in IPv4 or IPv6 .

To get the complete list of VLC's possibilities on each plateform supported,
see the VLC features page.

Note VLC doesn't work on Mac OS 9, and will probably never do.               
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.1.2.2. VLS

  VLS can stream :

  *  an MPEG-1, MPEG-2 or MPEG-4 files stored on a hard drive or on a CD,
   
  *  a DVD located in a local DVD drive or copied on a hard disk,
   
  *  a satellite card (DVB-S) or a digital terrestial television card (DVB-T)
    ,
   
  *  an MPEG encoding card ;
   

to:

  * one machine (i.e. to one IP address) : this is called unicast,
   
  * a dynamic group of machines that the clients can join or leave (i.e. to a
    multicast IP address) : this is called multicast,
   

in IPv4 or IPv6 .

A Pentium 100 MHz with 32 MB of memory should be enough to send one stream on
the network. When streaming a lot of videos stored on a hard drive, the
actual limitation is not the processor but the hard drive and the network
connection.

VLS works under Linux and Windows. To get the complete list of VLS's
possibilities on each plateform supported, see the streaming features page.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.1.2.3. Mini-SAP-server

 You can add a channel information service based on the SAP/SDP standard to
the VideoLAN solution. The mini-SAP-server sends announces about the
multicast programs on the network in IPv4 or IPv6, and VLCs receive these
annouces and automatically add the programs announced to their playlist.

 The mini-SAP-server works under Linux and Mac OS X.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.2. What is a codec ?

 To fully understand the VideoLAN solution, you must understand the
difference between a codec and a container format

  *  A codec is a compression algorithm, used to reduce the size of a stream.
    There are audio codecs and video codecs. MPEG-1, MPEG-2, MPEG-4, Vorbis,
    DivX, ... are codecs
   
  *  A container format contains one or several streams already encoded by
    codecs. Very often, there is an audio stream and a video one. AVI, Ogg,
    MOV, ASF, ... are container formats. The streams contained can be encoded
    using different codecs. In a perfect world, you could put any codec in
    any container format. Unfortunately, there are some incompatibilities.
    You can find a matrix of possible codecs and container formats on the 
    features page
   

 To decode a stream, VLC first demuxes it. This means that it reads the
container format and separates audio, video, and subtitles, if any. Then,
each of these are passed decoders that do the mathematical processing to
decompress the streams .

 There is a particular thing about MPEG:

  *  MPEG is a codec. There are several versions of it, called MPEG-1,
    MPEG-2, MPEG-4, ...
   
  * MPEG is also a container format, sometimes refered to as MPEG System.
    There are several types of MPEG: ES, PS, and TS
   
    When you play an MPEG video from a DVD, for instance, the MPEG stream is
    actually composed of several streams (called Elementary Streams, ES):
    there is one stream for video, one for audio, another for subtitles, and
    so on. These different streams are mixed together into a single Program
    Stream (PS). So, the .VOB files you can find in a DVD are actually
    MPEG-PS files. But this PS format is not adapted for streaming video
    through a network or by satellite, for instance. So, another format
    called Transport Stream (TS) was designed for streaming MPEG videos
    through such channels.
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.3. How can I use VideoLAN ?

1.3.1. Documentation

 The user documentation of VideoLAN is made up of 4 documents :

  *  the VideoLAN Quickstart. This document will give you a quick overview of
    of VLC, VLC's stream output, the Video On Demand solution and the channel
    information service system.
   
  *  the VideoLAN HOWTO. This document is the complete guide of the VideoLAN
    streaming solution.
   
  *  the VLC user guide. This document is the complete guide for VLC.
   
  *  the VLS user guide. This document is the complete guide for VLS.
   
  *  the VideoLAN FAQ. This document contains Frequently Asked Questions
    about VideoLAN.
   

  The latest version of these documents can be found on the [http://
www.videolan.org/doc/] documentation page .

  You can also have a look at the [http://wiki.videolan.org] VideoLAN Wiki.
This is a website that everyone can change. We use it to document everything
that is not in the "official" documentation: the tips and tricks for each
O.S., the graphical interfaces, etc...
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.3.2. User support

  If you have problems using VideoLAN, and if you don't find the answer to
your problems in the documentation, please look at the online archive of the
mailing-lists. There are two English-speaking mailing-lists for the users :

  * vlc@videolan.org for the questions on VLC ,
   
  * streaming@videolan.org for the questions on VLS, mini-SAP-server and the
    network .
   

  If you want to subscribe or unsubscribe to the mailing-lists, please go to
the [http://www.videolan.org/support/lists.html]  mailing-list page.

 You can also talk with VideoLAN users and developers on IRC : server 
irc.freenode.net, channel #videolan .

 If you find a bug, please follow the instructions on the [http://
www.videolan.org/support/bug-reporting.html]  bug reporting page .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.4. Command line usage

  *   VLC has many different graphical interfaces, that are organized quite
    differently in order to be in harmony with the guidelines of each
    operating system supported. Documenting the use of each graphical
    interface is too long, and some features are only available via the
    command line interface. Therefore we decided to document only the command
    line interface, but in many cases it shoud be easy to guess how to use
    the graphical interface for the same use !
   
  *  VLS has a command line and a telnet interface, but no graphical
    interface !
   

  All the commands that show up in this document should be typed inside a
terminal. .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.4.1. Open a terminal

1.4.1.1. Windows

 Click on Start, Run and type :

  * cmd Enter (Windows 2000 / XP),
   
  * command Enter (Windows 95 / 98 / ME).
   

 The terminal appears Le terminal apparait


Figure 1-2. Windows terminal

[terminal-windows]

Note Under Windows, you need to be in the directory where the program is     
     installed to run it.                                                    
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.4.1.2. Linux / Unix

 Open a terminal :


Figure 1-3. Linux X terminal

[terminal-linux]

 In the documentation, we adopt the following conventions for the Unix
commands :

  *  commands that should be typed as root have a # prompt :
    # command_to_be_typed_as_root                                            
   
  *  commands that should be typed as a regular user have a % prompt :
    % command_to_be_typed_as_regular_user                                    
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.4.1.3. Mac OS X

  Go to Applications, open the folder Utilities and double-click on Terminal
:


Figure 1-4. Mac OS X terminal

[terminal-macosx]

Note Under Mac OS X, you need to be in the directory where the program is    
     installed to run it, and start the command with ./ .                    
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.4.1.4. BeOS

 In the deskbar, go to Application and then Terminal :


Figure 1-5. BeOS terminal

[terminal-beos]

Note Under BeOS, you need to be in the directory where the program is        
     installed to run it, and start the command with ./ .                    
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 2. Modules and options for VLC

2.1. The modules

VLC uses a modular system, which allows to add easily new fonctions and
formats. Here is a description of nearly all the VLC modules. A few
"internal" modules won't be explained here. For a complete list of all VLC
modules, please have a look at the LIST file in the subdirectory "modules" of
the VLC source tree.

If you installed VLC through a binary file, you will get the default modules.
If, however, you want to customize VLC to your needs, you will have to
compile VLC from sources.

If you don't intend to compile VLC and want only the regular functions,
reading this part is not very useful.

The compilation itself is explained in the next chapter.

 If you wish to compile a module which is stated disabled by default, you
have to launch the configure script with :
% ./configure                                                                
--enable-module_name                                                         

 On the other hand, if you would like to disable a module that is enabled by
default, you would have to use :
% ./configure                                                                
--disable-module_name                                                        

 Each VLC module has its own help and options. To see what options are
associated with a module, use :
 % vlc -p                                                                    
module_name                                                                  

 or use the "Preferences" Panel of your favorite graphical interface .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2. Video outputs

 Video outputs are the modules that enable the support of some systems to
display the video on your screen.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.1. x11

default: enabled

 For Unix with X11 servers only

 This is the basic x11 video output. It only requires a working X11 server.
You will need xlibs headers to compile it (xlibs-dev package on Debian
systems).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.2. xvideo

default: enabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 It requires an xvideo compliant graphic card (it is the case for nearly all
modern cards). It uses hardware acceleration for YUV transformation and
rescaling.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.3. sdl

default: enabled

  This video output uses sdl libraries. You need at least version 1.1.6 of
this libraries.

  You may indicate the path to the sdl-config program with the  
--with-sdl-config-path=PATH switch, when running the configre script.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.4. directx

default: enabled on win32

 For Windows only

 This video output uses Microsoft Direct X libraries. It is recommended for
the win32 port.

 You may indicate the path to directX libraries and headers with the 
--with-directx=PATH switch, when running the configure script.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.5. wingdi

default: enabled on win32

 For Windows only

 This video output uses GDI. It is designed for users who don't have Direct
X, but the perfs are very low. If you have DirectX, do not use it.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.6. fb

default: enabled on GNU/Linux

 For GNU/Linux only

 This is the frame buffer video output. It requires that your kernel was
compiled with frame buffer support.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.7. glide

default: disabled

 This video output uses Glide libraries (hardware acceleration for 3Dfx
cards).

 You may indicate the path to the library with the --with-glide=PATH
configure option.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.8. mga

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This module provides hardware acceleration for Matrox cards under GNU/Linux.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.9. ggi

default: disabled
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.10. aa

default: disabled

 This is the ASCII Art Video Output. This video output uses the aalib library
to display video through ASCII art. It requires aalib headers (aalib1-dev
package under Debian GNU/Linux) to compile.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.11. svgalib

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This is a video output for the SVGAlib library.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.2.12. qte

default: disabled

 For iPaq only

 This is a video output for QT Embedded, an iPaq-specifiq graphical library .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3. Video filters modules

 These modules allow you to perform modifications on the rendered image .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.1. deinterlace

Always enabled

  This filter deinterlaces video. It is useful with streams coming from a
digital satellite channel or digital terrestial television channels .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.2. wall

Always enabled

 This filter allows you to have the video cut in pieces in several windows,
which you can order as you wish. It can be used to generate image walls with
several sources.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.3. distort

Always enabled

 This filter adds a distortion effect to the video. Who said it was useless ?
:-)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.4. transform

Always enabled

 This filter allows to rotate the video in several ways .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.5. invert

Always enabled

 This filter inverses colors.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.6. adjust

Always enabled

 This filter allows you to set image contrast, hue, saturation and brightness
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.7. clone

Always enabled

  Ce filtre vous permet de dupliquer l'image.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.8. crop

Always enabled

 This filter allows you to crop parts of the image.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.3.9. motionblur

Always enabled

 This filter adds a "motion blur" effect to the image.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4. Audio outputs

These modules allow you to choose the way the sound will be output to your
audio system .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.1. oss

default: enabled on GNU/Linux

 For GNU/Linux and Unix only

 This is the audio output for OSS (Open Sound System) output (/dev/dsp, for
example, under Linux). It requires that your kernel was compiled with support
for your sound card, or, if you use ALSA (Advanced Linux Sound System), the
OSS emulation layer must be active.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.2. alsa

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This is the sound output for ALSA (Advanced Linux Sound Architecture). It
only works under Linux, and it requires that you installed the ALSA drivers
and libraries.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.3. esd

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux & Unix only

 This sound output has ESD (Enlightened Sound Daemon) support (usually used
with Gnome). You must have the daemon and its libraries installed.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.4. arts

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux & Unix only

 This sound output has aRts (KDE's sound server) support. You must have the
daemon and its libraries installed .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.5. waveout

default: enabled on win

 For Windows only

 This is the Wave output, which is used by the win32 port.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.6. coreaudio

default: enabled on Mac OS X

 For Mac OS X only

 This audio output uses CoreAudio under Mac OS X
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.4.7. sdl

default: enabled

  This audio output uses SDL. Please refer to the video output.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5. Input modules

 These modules allow VLC to read its streams from different sources .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.1. dvdplay

default: enabled

 This is the regular DVD input module. It will need libdvdcss for DVD
decryption (see the [http://developers.videolan.org/libdvdcss/] libdvdcss
page) and libdvdplay for DVD navigation (see the [http://
developers.videolan.org/libdvdplay/] libdvdplay page) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.2. dvd

default: enabled

 This is the old DVD input module. It uses libdvdcss for DVD decryption (see
the libdvdcss page) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.3. dvdread

default: disabled

 This is an alternative to the previous ones. It uses libdvdread for DVD
reading (see the Ogle download page) and libdvdcss for DVD decryption (see
the libdvdcss page).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.4. vcd

default: enabled

This is the VideoCD input .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.5. cdda

default: enabled

This is the Audio CD input .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.6. http,ftp,udp,file,directory,mms

Always enabled

 These are standard input modules. The HTTP input can be used for Video On
Demand .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.7. satellite

default: disabled

 This is an input module that allows to read directly from a Hauppauge WinTV
Nova card under GNU/Linux. It requires drivers 0.9.4 available from [http://
www.linuxtv.org/] linuxtv.org .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.8. v4l

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This module allows to get Video4Linux streams .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.9. dvb

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This module allows to read from DVB-S, DVB-T, and DBC-C satellite, digital
terrestrial, or cable cards. It uses the Video4Linux 2 API, that is only
available in kernel 2.5.X and 2.6.X .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.10. pvr

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This module allows to read from Hauppauge PVR cards .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.5.11. slp

default: enabled

 This module allows to get the names and addresses for streams announced
using the SLP protocol
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6. Demuxers

 In a video stream, the video signal and the audio one are always into
"containers" formats. Demuxers extract the streams from it and pass it to the
decoders .

  For example, an AVI file can contain a MPEG-4 video, or an uncompressed
video. AVI is only a storing format, not a compression format .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.1. avi

Always enabled

 This module allows you to read .avi files .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.2. asf

Always enabled

 This module allows you to read .asf files
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.3. aac

Always enabled

 This module allows you to read AAC files
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.4. ogg

default: enabled

 This module allows you to read .ogg files
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.5. rawdv

Always enabled

 This module allows you to read DV files
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.6. dvbpsi

default: enabled

 This module allows to demux streams from a satellite card.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.7. mp4

Always enabled

 This module allows you to read .mp4 files
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.8. mkv

default: enabled

 This module allows you to read files that use the Matroska free format .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.9. ps,ts

Always enabled

 These modules allow you to read MPEG2 Program Stream or Transport Tream
files .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.6.10. id3,m3u

Always enabled

 These modules allow you to read M3U, B4S, PLS, and ASX playlists, and ID3
tags .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7. Interface modules

 These modules allow you to choose the interface or interfaces you want to
use (whether graphical or control interfaces).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.1. wxwindows

default: enabled

 The wxWindows interface is a portable interface that is currently working
under GNU/Linux and Windows. It is now the best graphical interface available
under both Windows and GNU/Linux .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.2. skins

default: enabled on win32

 This skinnable interface module works under Win32 and X11. You can create
your own skins very easily with XML files .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.3. gtk

default: enabled

 This is the GTK+ interface. It needs gtk libraries and headers files if you
are compiling it. Note that it can also be used under Windows .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.4. gnome

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This is the Gnome interface. It needs gnome libraries (libgnome32 package
under Debian) and headers (libgnome-dev package under Debian) if you wish to
compile it .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.5. qt

default: disabled

 This is the QT interface module. You will need the libraries (libqt2 package
on Debian) and headers (libqt-dev package under Debian) if you wish to
compile it .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.6. kde

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This is the KDE interface module. You will need the libraries (kdelibs3
package on Debian) and headers (kde-devel package under Debian) if you wish
to compile it .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.7. rc

Always enabled

 This is the Remote Control interface module. It allows you to control VLC
via commands, such as play, stop, etc... or via a script. This interface is
text-based, so you should use it when you are in console mode .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.8. http

Always enabled

 This module allows you to remote control your VLC via a web browser. You can
create custom web pages. [http://wiki.videolan.org/index.php/HTTP] More info
here .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.9. ncurses

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

  This is a text interface, using ncurses library. You will need ncurses
headers if you want to compile it (libncurses5-dev package on Debian) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.10. lirc

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This interface module allows you to control VLC through a remote. A lircrc
example is provided to help you configure it to your remote (see doc/lirc/
example.lircrc) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.11. opie

default: disabled

 This is an interface plugin for the Qt Embedded library (iPaq graphical
library) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.12. gestures

Always enabled

 This module allows you to control VLC via mouse gestures .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.7.13. joystick

default: disabled

 For GNU/Linux only

 This module allows you to control VLC via a joystick with many options. More
information can be found [http://wiki.videolan.org/index.php/Joystick] here .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8. Codec modules

 The following modules add codec (ie, compression formats) support .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.1. a52

default: enabled

 This decoder uses liba52 (see the [http://liba52.sourceforge.net/] liba52
web site .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.2. ffmpeg

default: enabled

 This is a free MPEG-4/DivX/OpenDivX codec : ffmpeg (see the ffmpeg web site)
.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.3. vorbis

default: enabled

 This codec allows you to read the Vorbis (audio) encoded files .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.4. xvid

default: disabled

 This codec allows you to read files encoded with Xvid (see Xvid web site) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.5. mad

default: enabled

 This codec is a very smart MP3 decoder, that only uses integers. This allows
its use for CPU which don't handle floating point numbers (on PDA, for
example) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.6. libmpeg2

default: enabled

 This codec allows to read MPEG2 files .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.7. faad

default: disabled

 Faad is an MPEG-4 audio decoder .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.8. tarkin

default: disabled

 tarkin is a new codec (experimental) by the Ogg Project (see the Ogg Vorbis
web site) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.9. theora

default: disabled

 theora is a new codec (experimental) by the Ogg Project (see the Ogg Vorbis
web site) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.10. cinepak

default: enabled

 This codec decodes the Cinepak format .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.8.11. tremor

default: disabled

 This is an Ogg/Vorbis codec that only makes integer calculus, which allow
its use on CPU which don't have floating point support (see the Ogg Vorbis
web .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.9. OS support modules

 The following modules add support for different OSs .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.9.1. macosx

 This is the MacOS X support module, including a native interface .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.9.2. qnx

 This is the QNX RTOS support module .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.10. Miscellaneous

 This section describes a few more modules that don't belong to any of the
categories described before .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.10.1. sout

default: enabled

 Stream Output is a new feature of VLC that allows it to stream an MPEG-1,
MPEG-2 or MPEG-4/DivX file or a DVD .

 For more details, please have a look at the The command line interface
section .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.10.2. test-suite

default: disabled

 This builds a special VLC, for testing purposes only .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.10.3. mozilla

default: disabled

  This is not really a module. When enabled, a VLC-based Mozilla plugin is
built .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.10.4. xosd

default: disabled

 For Unix only

  This plugin outputs the current stream to an "OSD" (On Screen Display) .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.11. Compilation Options

 There are a few options that you can set when running the configure script,
which are not related to modules .

 You can have a look at these options by typing :
% ./configure --help                                                         

 You can for example control all the installation directories, the system for
which you want to build VLC for (if not guessed correctly),...

 You can also choose to enable or disable some optimizations.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2.11.1. --disable-plugins

  If you select this option, no plugins will be enabled. This is definitely
not recommended, as you would get a very poor VLC, and should only be used
for testing purposes .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 3. Installing VLC

3.1. Installing VLC

  There are VLC binaries available for the many OSes, but not for all
supported OSes. If there are no binaries for your OS or if you want to change
the default settings, you can compile VLC from sources.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.1. Windows

  VLC works under Windows 95/98/ME/2000/XP. Download the self-extracting file
from the VLC Windows download page. Launch the .exe to install VLC.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.2. BeOS

  Download the Zip file from the VLC BeOS download page. Unzip the file in a
directory to install VLC.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.3. Mac OS X

  Download the Mac OS X package from the VLC MacOS X download page .
Double-click on the icon of the package : an icon will appear on your
Desktop, right beside your drive(s). Open it and drag the VLC application
from the resulting window to the place where you want to install it (it
should be /Applications).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.4. Debian GNU/Linux

3.1.4.1. Debian stable (woody)

Add the following lines to your /etc/apt/sources.list:
deb http://www.videolan.org/pub/videolan/debian $(ARCH)/                     
deb-src http://www.videolan.org/pub/videolan/debian sources/                 

 Then, for a normal install, do:
# apt-get update                                                             
# apt-get install gnome-vlc libdvdcss2                                       
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.4.2. Debian unstable (sid)

Add the following lines to your /etc/apt/sources.list:
deb http://www.videolan.org/pub/videolan/debian $(ARCH)/                     
deb-src http://www.videolan.org/pub/videolan/debian sources/                 

 Then, for a normal install, do:
# apt-get update                                                             
# apt-get install wxvlc libdvdcss2                                           
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.4.3. Debian testing (sarge)

  You should not be using Debian testing unless you perfectly know what you
are doing. It is almost impossible to support Debian testing and there are no
plans to do it. For more informations on Debian testing, please look: [http:/
/www.debian.org/devel/testing] testing page
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.5. Linux Mandrake

  There are VLC packages for Mandrake 9.1 and cooker.

  To install them, add the following sources for either Mandrake 9.1 or
Cooker (you can use [http://plf.zarb.org/~nanardon/] Easy urpmi for that): 
contrib from the core distribution and plf (Penguin Liberation Front) from
the external add-ons.

 Then install the required packages with urpmi:
# urpmi libdvdcss2 libdvdplay0 wxvlc vlc-plugin-a52 vlc-plugin-ogg vlc-plugin-mad 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.6. Linux Redhat

 Download the RPM package vlc and the packages listed in the required
libraries and codecs section (the other packages are just optional) from the 
VLC Red Hat download page and put them all into the same directory.

Then install the RPM packages you have downloaded:
# rpm -U *.rpm                                                               

  If you have not installed all the RPM packages included with your
distribution, you may be asked to install a few of them first.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.7. Compile the sources by yourself (for every other OS)

The method below is for any Unix system supported by VLC, for which there is
no packages available. It explains how to compile and install VLC and the
needed libraries from their source code.

You can also compile VLC under Linux this way if you want to modify the
default supported modules.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.7.1. Install the libraries

Many libraries are needed :

  * libdvbpsi (compulsory) ,
   
  * mpeg2dec (compulsory) ,
   
  * libdvdcss if you want to be able to read encrypted DVDs ,
   
  * libdvdplay if you want to have DVD menu navigation ,
   
  * a52dec if you want to be able to decode the AC3 (i.e. A52) sound format
    often used in DVDs ,
   
  * ffmpeg, libmad, faad2 if you want to read MPEG 4 / DivX files ,
   
  * libogg & libvorbis if you want to read Ogg Vorbis files .
   

 Download the libraries from the VLC sources download page.

 For each library :

  *  uncompress :
    % tar xvzf library.tar.gz                                                
   
    or
    % tar xvjf library.tar.bz2                                               
   
  *  configure :
    % cd library                                                             
    % ./configure                                                            
   
  *  compile and install :
    % make                                                                   
    # make install                                                           
   

  Check that the configuration file /etc/ld.so.conf contains the following
line :
/usr/local/lib                                                               

  If the line is not present, add-it and then run (as root):
# ldconfig                                                                   
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.1.7.2. Install VLC

  Download the sources of the lastest release : get the file
vlc-version.tar.gz from the VLC sources download page. Uncompress-it :
% tar xvzf vlc-version.tar.gz                                                
% cd vlc-version                                                             

  To get the list of configuration options, do :
% ./configure --help                                                         

 Please note that all the modules are described in the Modules section of the
VLC User Guide .

 Examples of very simple configurations:

  *  if you want a basic VLC, do :
    % ./configure                                                            
   
  *   if you want the Gnome interface instead of the GTK interface (you will
    need the developement packages of Gnome) :
    % ./configure --enable-gnome                                             
   

 Then, compile and install :
% make                                                                       
% su                                                                         
Password:  [Root Password]                                                   
# make install                                                               

  Please note that the installation (make install command) is not mandatory.
You can execute VLC from where you compiled it.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2. Uninstalling VLC

3.2.1. Windows

  Click on the Uninstall VLC icon that was created during installation .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.2. BeOS

 Delete the vlc-version directory. You can also remove the configuration file
/boot/home/config/settings/vlcrc .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.3. Mac OS X

 Drag the VLC application to your trash can .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.4. Debian GNU/Linux

 Remove the packages that you installed :
# apt-get remove --purge vlc-gnome vlc-mad libdvdcss2 libdvbpsi1             
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.5. GNU/Linux Redhat, Mandrake and SuSE

 Uninstall the RPM packages that you installed :
# rpm -e vlc-version vlc-mad-version vlc-gnome-version                       
libdvdcss2-version libdvdpsi1-version                                        
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.6. If you compiled VLC from sources

 Go to the directory containing VLC sources and execute :
# make uninstall                                                             

 Then you can remove the VLC sources .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 4. The command line interface

4.1. Introduction

 Many options are only available through command line. They are detailed here
.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.2. Opening streams

 The following commands start VLC and add the first element to the playlist .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.2.1. Opening a file

 Start VLC with :
% vlc -vvv my_file.mpg                                                       

 Although VLC should be able to recognize the file type, you may tell VLC
what codec to use with the --codec option. For example to play my_file.mpg
using ffmpeg audo/video decoder do :
% vlc -vvv --codec ffmpeg my_file.mpg                                        

  A list of all video and audio codecs supported by VLC is available on the 
VLC features list .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.2.2. Opening a DVD or VCD, or an audio CD

 Start VLC with
% vlc -vvv dvd:[device][@raw_device][@[title][,[chapter][,angle]]]           
                                                                             

 or (VCD):
% vlc -vvv vcd:[device][@[title][,[chapter][peripherique][@[titre][,chapitre]] 

 or (Audio CD):
% vlc -vvv cdda:[device][@[title]][peripherique][@[titre]]                   

 where device is the complete path to your DVD or CD-ROM drive .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.2.3. Start a network stream

 To receive an unicast UDP stream (sent by VLS or VLC's stream output), start
VLC with :
% vlc -vvv udp:[@:server_port]                                               

 To receive an multicast UDP stream (sent by VLS or VLC's stream output),
start VLC with :
% vlc -vvv udp:@multicast_address[:server_port]                              

 To receive a HTTP stream, start VLC with :
% vlc -vvv http://www.example.org/your_file.mpg                              
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.3. Modules selection

  VLC tries to select the most appropriate interface, input and output
modules, among the ones available on the system, according to the stream it
is given to read. However, you may wish to force the use of a specific module
with the following options (for the complete list of modules, see the Modules
and options for VLC section) ) :

  * --intf <module> allows you to select the interface module .
   
  * --extraintf <module> allows you to select extra interface modules that
    will be launched in addition to the main one .
   
  * --aout <module> allows you to select the audio output module .
   
  * --vout <module> allows you to select the video output module .
   
  * --filter <module> allows you to add a video filter module .
   
  * --memcpy <module> allows you to choose a memory copy module .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.4. Stream Output

4.4.1. Description of the stream output

 VLC's stream output allows VLC to be used as a streaming server instead of a
client ! It has very extended capabilities :

  *  stream in unicast and multicast on an IPv4 or IPv6 network everything
    that VLC is able to read, via UDP, RTP or HTTP ;
   
  *  save the input stream to a file in AVI, PS, TS or OGG format ;
   
  *  transcode an input stream, and then, send it, to the network or to a
    file .
   

 To know about the full possibilities of VLC's stream output, see the [http:/
/www.videolan.org/streaming/features.html]  streaming features page .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.4.2. Architecture and syntax

 the stream output has a powerful architecture that uses modules. Each module
has capabilities, and you can chain the modules to enhance the possibilities
.

 Here is the list of the modules currently available :

  * standard "sends" the stream via an access output module: for example,
    UDP, file, HTTP, ... You will probably want to use this module at the end
    of your chains .
   
  * transcode allows you to transcode the audio and the video of the input
    stream "on the fly" (if your computer is powerful enough) .
   
  * duplicate allows you to create a second chain, where the stream will be
    handled in an independant way .
   
  * display allows you to display the input stream, as VLC would normally do.
    Used with the duplicate module, this allows you to view the stream as you
    send it .
   
  * es allows you to make separate Elementary Etreams (ES) out of an input
    stream .
   

 Each of these modules may take options. Here is the syntax that you must use
:
% vlc input_stream --sout '#module1{option1=...,option2=...}:#module2{option1=...,option2=...}:...' 

 For example, to transcode a stream and send it, use :
% vlc input_stream --sout '#transcode{options}:#standard{options}'           
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.4.3. Description of the modules

4.4.3.1. standard (alias std)

 Sends a stream .

Options:

  * access: how to send : file, udp, rtp, http.
   
  * mux: which muxer (ie, which format) will be used. It can be one of avi
    (for AVI format) , ogg (for OGG format) , ps (for MPEG2-PS format) , ts
    (for MPEG2-TS format) .
   
  * url: if you use the file access, it will be the location where to store
    the stream; if you use another access, it will be the unicast or
    multicast IP address where you want to stream .
   
  * sap: if you use the udp or rtp accesses, use this option to announce your
    stream, using SAP/SDP. This option contains the name under which you want
    to announce the program .
   
  * slp: like sap, but use the SLP protocol. You need to have libslp on your
    system .
   
  * sap_ipv: if you use the sap option, use this option to specify if you
    want to send the SAP announces in IPv4 or IPv6. The value of this option
    is 4 or 6 si vous utilisez sap, utilisez ceci pour spécifier si vous
    désirez envoyer les annonces SAP en IPv4 -défaut- ou IPv6. La valeur à
    utiliser est 4 ou 6 .
   

Note If you are streaming in multicast, you may want to use the global option
     --ttl 12 to set the TTL to a value superior to 1.                       
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.4.3.2. display

 Displays the stream .

Options:

  * noaudio: Ignore audio .
   
  * novideo: Ignore video .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.4.3.3. duplicate

 Duplicates the stream to a new stream output chain .

Options:

  * dst: A new stream output chain of modules, as described earlier .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.4.3.4. transcode

 Changes the codec and/or bitrates for a stream .

Options:

  * acodec: the new audio codec. It can be one of mpga (MPEG audio layer 2), 
    a52 or ac3 (AC3 sound) or vorb (Vorbis)
   
  * ab: audio bitrate in Kbps .
   
  * vcodec: the new video codec. It can be one of mp4v (MPEG4), mpgv (MPEG1),
    DIV1, DIV2, DIV3 (DivX 1,2,3), H263 (H263), I263 (H263I), WMV1 or WMV2
    (Windows Media Video 1 or 2), MJPG (MJPEG), MJPB (MJPEGB) .
   
  * width: video width .
   
  * height: video height .
   
  * vb: video bitrate in kbps .
   
  * vt: video bitrate tolerance in bps .
   
  * deinterlace: deinterlace the stream .
   
  * croptop: number of pixels removed from the top of the video .
   
  * cropbottom: number of pixel removed from the bottom of the video .
   
  * cropleft: number of pixels removed from the left of the video .
   
  * cropright: number of pixels removed from the right of the video .
   
  * hq: high quality transcoding (uses more CPU) .
   
  * qmin: minimum video quantiser scale (VBR)
   
  * qmax: maximum video quantiser scale (VBR) .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.4.3.5. es

 Make separate Elementary Streams .

Options:

  * access_audio: how to send the audio track: file, udp, rtp or http .
   
  * access_video: how to send the vidéo track: file, udp, rtp or http .
   
  * access: if you want the audio and the video tracks to use the same
    access, use this option instead of the two above .
   
  * mux_audio: which muxer (ie, which format) will be used for the audio
    track. It can be one of avi (for AVI format), ogg (for OGG format), ps
    (for MPEG2-PS format), ts (for MPEG2-TS format) .
   
  * mux_video: which muxer (ie, which format) will be used for the video
    track. It can be one of avi (for AVI format), ogg (for OGG format), ps
    (for MPEG2-PS format), ts (for MPEG2-TS format) .
   
  * mux: if you want the audio and the video tracks to use the same muxer,
    use this option instead of the two above .
   
  * url_audio: if you use the file access, it will be the location where to
    store the audio track; if you use another access, it will be the unicast
    or multicast IP address where you want to stream .
   
  * url_video: if you use the file access, it will be the location where to
    store the vidéo track; if you use another access, it will be the unicast
    or multicast IP address where you want to stream .
   
  * url: if you want the audio and the video tracks to use the same url, use
    this option instead of the two above .
   

Note In the url options, if you use the file access, you can use the         
     following macros in the filename:                                       
                                                                             
       * %n = stream number ;                                                
                                                                             
       * %c = FOURCC ;                                                       
                                                                             
       * %m = muxer ;                                                        
                                                                             
       * %a = access.                                                        
                                                                             
                                                                             
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.4.3.6. Miscellaneous

 Here are a few additional global options

  * --no-sout-audio disables audio stream output .
   
  * --no-sout-video disables video stream output .
   

  The stream output also offers a simplified syntax, with which you can only
you use the standard module main options :
% vlc input_stream --sout access/mux:url                                     

  where access, mux and url are as defined in the options of the standard
module .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.4.4. Examples

 To understand fully the complex syntax of VLC's stream output, please look
at the use cases of the VideoLAN HOWTO .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.5. Other Options

4.5.1. Audio options

  * --noaudio disables audio output .
   
  * --mono forces VLC to treat the stream in mono audio .
   
  * --volume <integer> sets the level of audio output .
   
  * --aout-rate <integer> sets the audio output frequency (Hz) .
   
  * --desync <integer> compensates desynchronization of audio (ms) .
   
  * --headphone activates headphone virtual spatialization effect .
   
  * --headphone-dim sets headphone characteristic dimension .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.5.2. Video options

  * --novideo disables video output .
   
  * --greyscale turns video output into greyscale mode .
   
  * --fullscreen sets fullscreen video .
   
  * --nooverlay disables hardware acceleration for the video output .
   
  * --width, --height <integer> sets the video window dimensions .
   
  * --zoom <float> adds a zoom factor .
   
  * --aspect-ratio <mode> forces source aspect ratio .
   
  * --spumargin <integer> forces SPU subtitles postion .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.5.3. Playlist options

  * --playlist launches playlist on startup .
   
  * --random plays files randomly forever .
   
  * --enqueue enqueues items in playlist .
   
  * --loop loops playlist on end .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.5.4. Network options

  * --server-port <integer> sets server port .
   
  * --iface <string> specifies the network interface to use .
   
  * --iface-addr <string> specifies your network interface IP address .
   
  * --mtu <integer> specifies the MTU of the network interface .
   
  * --ipv6 forces IPv6 .
   
  * --ipv4 forces IPv4 .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.5.5. CPU options

  * --nommx disables the use of MMX CPU extensions .
   
  * --no3dn disables the use of 3D Now! CPU extensions .
   
  * --nommxext disables the use of MMX Ext CPU extensions .
   
  * --nosse disables the use of SSE CPU extensions .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.5.6. Miscellaneous options

  * --quiet be quiet .
   
  * --color displays color messages .
   
  * --search-path <string> specifies interface default search path .
   
  * --plugin-path <string> specifies plugin search path .
   
  * --dvd <string> specifies the default VCD device .
   
  * --vcd <string> specifies the default VCD device .
   
  * --program <;integer> specifies program (SID) (for streams with several
    programs, like satellite ones) .
   
  * --audio-type <integer> specifies the default audio type to use with dvds
    .
   
  * --audio-channel <integer> specifies the default audio channel to use with
    dvds .
   
  * --spu-channel <integer> specifies the default subtitle channel to use
    with dvds .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4.5.7. Help options

  * --verbose <verbosity> specifies verbosity level .
   
  * --help gives you all available options .
   
  * --longhelp gives you a detailled version of the available options .
   
  * --version gives you information about the current VLC version .
   
  * --list displays a list of available plugins .
   
  * --module <module> displays help about specified module .
   

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter 5. The Mozilla plugin

 VLC can also be embeded in a web browser ! For the moment, this function is
only available with [http://www.mozilla.org/] Mozilla under GNU/Linux .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.1. Install the plugin

5.1.1. GNU/Linux Debian

 You should already have the following lines in your /etc/apt/sources.list
file :
deb http://www.videolan.org/pub/videolan/debian $(ARCH)/                     
deb-src http://www.videolan.org/pub/videolan/debian sources/                 

 Install the mozilla-plugin-vlc package :
# apt-get update                                                             
# apt-get install mozilla-plugin-vlc                                         
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.1.2. Compile the sources yourself

Install the Mozilla development package (mozilla-dev under Debian) .

  Install the required librairies like for a normal VLC install (from the
sources, or from the packages with the development packages).

  Download the sources of the lastest release : get the file
vlc-version.tar.gz from the VLC sources download page. Uncompress-it,
configure-it, compile and install Téléchargez les sources de la dernière
version : récupérez le fichier vlc-version.tar.gz depuis la page de
téléchargement des sources de VLC. Décompressez-le, configurez-le, compilez
et installez :
% tar xvzf vlc-version.tar.gz                                                
% cd vlc-version                                                             
% ./configure --enable-mozilla                                               
% make                                                                       
% su                                                                         
Password:  [Root Password]                                                   
# make install                                                               
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2. Build HTML pages that use the plugin

 Here are a few examples of HTML pages that use the Mozilla plugin .
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2.1. Example 1

 In this example, the plugin will read an HTTP stream inside the web page. If
the user goes fullscreen, he will have to press f to go back in normal view .
<html>                                                                         
<head><title>Demo of VLC mozilla plugin</title></head>                         
                                                                               
<body>                                                                         
                                                                               
<h1>Demo of VLC mozilla plugin - Example 1</h1>                                
                                                                               
<embed type="application/x-vlc-plugin"                                         
         name="video1"                                                         
         autoplay="no" loop="yes" width="400" height="300"                     
         target="http://server.example.org/video1.vob" />                      
<br />                                                                         
  <a href="javascript:;" onclick='document.video1.play()'>Play video1</a>      
  <a href="javascript:;" onclick='document.video1.pause()'>Pause video1</a>    
  <a href="javascript:;" onclick='document.video1.stop()'>Stop video1</a>      
  <a href="javascript:;" onclick='document.video1.fullscreen()'>Fullscreen</a> 
                                                                               
</body>                                                                        
</html>                                                                        
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5.2.2. Example 2

In this example, the plugin will read a multicast UDP stream in a dedicated
video output window .
<html>                                                                         
<head><title>Demo of VLC mozilla plugin</title></head>                         
                                                                               
<body>                                                                         
                                                                               
<h1>Demo of VLC mozilla plugin - Example 2</h1>                                
                                                                               
<embed type="application/x-vlc-plugin"                                         
         name="video2"                                                         
         autoplay="no" loop="no" hidden="yes"                                  
         target="udp:@239.255.12.42" />                                        
<br />                                                                         
  <a href="javascript:;" onclick='document.video2.play()'>Play video2</a>      
  <a href="javascript:;" onclick='document.video2.stop()'>Stop video2</a>      
  <a href="javascript:;" onclick='document.video2.fullscreen()'>Fullscreen</a> 
                                                                               
</body>                                                                        
</html>                                                                        
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix A. GNU Free Documentation License

Version 1.2, November 2002

   
    Copyright (C) 2000,2001,2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 59 Temple
    Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA Everyone is permitted to copy
    and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing it
    is not allowed.
   
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
A.1. PREAMBLE

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
functional and useful document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure
everyone the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially. Secondarily, this
License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get credit for their
work, while not being considered responsible for modifications made by
others.

This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works of
the document must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the
GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft license designed for free
software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free program
should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the software does.
But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used for any
textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether it is published as a
printed book. We recommend this License principally for works whose purpose
is instruction or reference.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.2. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that
contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed
under the terms of this License. Such a notice grants a world-wide,
royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that work under the
conditions stated herein. The "Document", below, refers to any such manual or
work. Any member of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you". You
accept the license if you copy, modify or distribute the work in a way
requiring permission under copyright law.

A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the Document
or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or
translated into another language.

A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the
Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or
authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject (or to related
matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly within that overall
subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics, a
Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be
a matter of historical connection with the subject or with related matters,
or of legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position
regarding them.

The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are
designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says
that the Document is released under this License. If a section does not fit
the above definition of Secondary then it is not allowed to be designated as
Invariant. The Document may contain zero Invariant Sections. If the Document
does not identify any Invariant Sections then there are none.

The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as
Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the
Document is released under this License. A Front-Cover Text may be at most 5
words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.

A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the general
public, that is suitable for revising the document straightforwardly with
generic text editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic paint
programs or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is
suitable for input to text formatters or for automatic translation to a
variety of formats suitable for input to text formatters. A copy made in an
otherwise Transparent file format whose markup, or absence of markup, has
been arranged to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by readers is
not Transparent. An image format is not Transparent if used for any
substantial amount of text. A copy that is not "Transparent" is called
"Opaque".

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII
without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using a
publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML, PostScript or
PDF designed for human modification. Examples of transparent image formats
include PNG, XCF and JPG. Opaque formats include proprietary formats that can
be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which
the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available, and the
machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF produced by some word processors
for output purposes only.

The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus such
following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this License
requires to appear in the title page. For works in formats which do not have
any title page as such, "Title Page" means the text near the most prominent
appearance of the work's title, preceding the beginning of the body of the
text.

A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document whose title
either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that
translates XYZ in another language. (Here XYZ stands for a specific section
name mentioned below, such as "Acknowledgements", "Dedications",
"Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the Title" of such a section when
you modify the Document means that it remains a section "Entitled XYZ"
according to this definition.

The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which states
that this License applies to the Document. These Warranty Disclaimers are
considered to be included by reference in this License, but only as regards
disclaiming warranties: any other implication that these Warranty Disclaimers
may have is void and has no effect on the meaning of this License.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.3. VERBATIM COPYING

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially
or noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices, and
the license notice saying this License applies to the Document are reproduced
in all copies, and that you add no other conditions whatsoever to those of
this License. You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the
reading or further copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you
may accept compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large
enough number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may
publicly display copies.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.4. COPYING IN QUANTITY

If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have printed
covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document's license
notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the copies in covers that
carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the
front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back cover. Both covers must also
clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher of these copies. The front
cover must present the full title with all words of the title equally
prominent and visible. You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the
title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as
verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you
should put the first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual
cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more
than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along
with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a
computer-network location from which the general network-using public has
access to download using public-standard network protocols a complete
Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material. If you use the
latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin
distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this Transparent
copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location until at least one
year after the last time you distribute an Opaque copy (directly or through
your agents or retailers) of that edition to the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them
a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.5. MODIFICATIONS

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the
conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified
Version under precisely this License, with the Modified Version filling the
role of the Document, thus licensing distribution and modification of the
Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it. In addition, you must do
these things in the Modified Version:

 A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from
    that of the Document, and from those of previous versions (which should,
    if there were any, be listed in the History section of the Document). You
    may use the same title as a previous version if the original publisher of
    that version gives permission.
   
 B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
    responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version,
    together with at least five of the principal authors of the Document (all
    of its principal authors, if it has fewer than five), unless they release
    you from this requirement.
   
 C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified
    Version, as the publisher.
   
 D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
   
 E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to
    the other copyright notices.
   
 F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving
    the public permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this
    License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
   
 G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and
    required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
   
 H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
   
 I. Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add to
    it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher
    of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page. If there is no
    section Entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating the title,
    year, authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page,
    then add an item describing the Modified Version as stated in the
    previous sentence.
   
 J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public
    access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network
    locations given in the Document for previous versions it was based on.
    These may be placed in the "History" section. You may omit a network
    location for a work that was published at least four years before the
    Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version it refers to
    gives permission.
   
 K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", Preserve
    the Title of the section, and preserve in the section all the substance
    and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications
    given therein.
   
 L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their
    text and in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not
    considered part of the section titles.
   
 M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not be
    included in the Modified Version.
   
 N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled "Endorsements" or to
    conflict in title with any Invariant Section.
   
 O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
   

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that
qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the
Document, you may at your option designate some or all of these sections as
invariant. To do this, add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in
the Modified Version's license notice. These titles must be distinct from any
other section titles.

You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing
but endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties--for example,
statements of peer review or that the text has been approved by an
organization as the authoritative definition of a standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of
Cover Texts in the Modified Version. Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and
one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or through arrangements made by) any
one entity. If the Document already includes a cover text for the same cover,
previously added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are
acting on behalf of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old
one, on explicit permission from the previous publisher that added the old
one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give
permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply
endorsement of any Modified Version.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.6. COMBINING DOCUMENTS

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions,
provided that you include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of
all of the original documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant
Sections of your combined work in its license notice, and that you preserve
all their Warranty Disclaimers.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple
identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are
multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but different contents, make
the title of each such section unique by adding at the end of it, in
parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher of that section if
known, or else a unique number. Make the same adjustment to the section
titles in the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice of the
combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled "History" in the
various original documents, forming one section Entitled "History"; likewise
combine any sections Entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled
"Dedications". You must delete all sections Entitled "Endorsements".
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.7. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in the
collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for verbatim
copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it
individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License
into the extracted document, and follow this License in all other respects
regarding verbatim copying of that document.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.8. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and
independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, is called an "aggregate" if the copyright resulting from
the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights of the compilation's
users beyond what the individual works permit. When the Document is included
an aggregate, this License does not apply to the other works in the aggregate
which are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of
the Document, then if the Document is less than one half of the entire
aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on covers that bracket
the Document within the aggregate, or the electronic equivalent of covers if
the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise they must appear on printed
covers that bracket the whole aggregate.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.9. TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute
translations of the Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing
Invariant Sections with translations requires special permission from their
copyright holders, but you may include translations of some or all Invariant
Sections in addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections.
You may include a translation of this License, and all the license notices in
the Document, and any Warrany Disclaimers, provided that you also include the
original English version of this License and the original versions of those
notices and disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between the translation
and the original version of this License or a notice or disclaimer, the
original version will prevail.

If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements", "Dedications",
or "History", the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section 1)
will typically require changing the actual title.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.10. TERMINATION

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except as
expressly provided for under this License. Any other attempt to copy, modify,
sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will automatically
terminate your rights under this License. However, parties who have received
copies, or rights, from you under this License will not have their licenses
terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.11. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU
Free Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be
similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address
new problems or concerns. See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the
Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this License "or any
later version" applies to it, you have the option of following the terms and
conditions either of that specified version or of any later version that has
been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the
Document does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose
any version ever published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

A.12. ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of the
License in the document and put the following copyright and license notices
just after the title page:

   
      Copyright (c) YEAR YOUR NAME. Permission is granted to copy, distribute
    and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
    License, Version 1.2 or any later version published by the Free Software
    Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no
    Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license is included in the section
    entitled "GNU Free Documentation License".
   
If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover Texts,
replace the "with...Texts." line with this:

   
      with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
    Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.
   
If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other combination
of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the situation.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we recommend
releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of free software
license, such as the GNU General Public License, to permit their use in free
software.
